## [Making Geo-Replicated Systems Fast as Possible, Consistent when Necessary (2012)](#making-geo-replicated-systems-fast-as-possible-consistent-when-necessary-2012)
Strong consistency is easy to reason about but hurts performance; weak
consistency is hard to reason about but can be implemented efficiently.
Allowing operations to run at different consistency levels is a first step
towards compromising between strong and weak consistency, but databases
that allow for mixed consistency operations place a burden on users to think
critically about which operations should run at which consistency level to
ensure application correctness. This paper makes three contributions:

1. It introduces *RedBlue Consistency*. Intuitively, red operations are
   synchronized while blue operations execute locally and are asynchronously
   replicated.
2. It provides sufficient conditions for which operations can be blue and which
   can be red while still ensuring the system is confluent and also
   invariant-confluent.
3. It introduces a novel way to decompose operations into side-effect free
   *generator operations* and *shadow operations* which are asynchronously
   applied at all sites. This decomposition improves the commutativity of the
   system allowing for more blue operations.

It also implements a RedBlue consistent database dubbed *Gemini*.

**Related Work.**
There are a huge number of databases that can be characterized by various
properties like low latency, causality, state convergence, single value, stable
histories, general operations, invariants, and eventual propagation.  Moreover,
there are a huge number of different consistency models like linearizability,
timeline consistency, snapshot consistency, fork consistency, and eventual
consistency.

**System Model.**
In our model, data is replicated across `k` sites. Each site has a state `S`
and executes operations `u, v`. We denote the application of an operation `u`
to a database state `S` as `S + u`. We say two operations `u, v` commute if for
all database stats `S`, `S + u + v = S + v + u`. We say a database state `S` is
valid if satisfies user's invariants. Every update is applied at a single site
before being propagated to other sites.

**RedBlue Consistency.**
Given disjoint sets of operations `R`, and `B`, a *RedBlue order* is a partial
order (U = R cup B, <) where elements in `R` are totally ordered. That is for
all `r, r'` in `R`, either `r < r'` or `r' < r`.

For a site `i`, an *i-causal serialization* of `O = (U, <)` is a total order
`(O, <<)`, where

1. `<<` extends `<`. That is for all `u, v` if `u < v` then `u << v`.
2. If `site(v) = i` and `u << v` then `u < v`. This implies that if `v` on `i`
   is concurrent with operation `u` not on `i`, then `v` must come before `u`
   in `<<`.

A system is *O-RedBlue consistent* if every site `i` runs an i-causal
serialization of `O`. Note that if all operations are red, then RedBlue
consistency is equivalent to serializability. If all operations are blue, then
it is equivalent to eventual consistency.

We say a RedBlue consistent system is *state convergent* if all causal
serializations reach the final state.  Note that not all RedBlue consistent
systems are state convergent. Two causal serializations could result in
different states. If all blue operations commute with all other operations
(i.e. they are *globally commutative*), then RedBlue consistency implies state
convergence.

**Replicating Side Effects.**
Some blue operations are not commutative but can be transformed into a
commutative alternative. We decompose an operation `u` into a generator
operation `g_u` and shadow operation `h_u(S)` where `S + g+u = S` and `S +
h_u(S) = S + u`. This is similar to how updates are decomposed in operation
based CRDTs.

Given a site `i`, a set of shadow operations `U` and the set of generator
operations `V_i` executed at `i`, an i-causal serialization of `O = (U, <)` is
a total order `O_i = (U cup V_i, <<)` where

- `<<` extends `<`.
- For any `h_v(S)` in `U` generated by `g_v` in `V_i`, `S` is the state
  obtained by applying all the shadow operations before `g_v`.
- For any `g_v` in `V_i` and `h_u(S)` in `U`, `h_u(S) << g_v` if and only if
  `h_u(S) < h_v(S')`. Again this says that if `h_u(S)` and `h_v(S')` are
  concurrent, then `g_v` and `h_v(S')` should come first.

Note that even if a RedBlue consistent system is state convergent, user
invariants can still be broken.  We say shadow operation `h_u(S)` is *invariant
safe* if for all valid stats `S` and `S'`, `S' + h_u(S)` is valid. In words,
replicating operations on valid states to other valid states preserves
validity. If all blue operations are invariant safe and globally commutative
then no site will ever enter an invalid state and sites will converge. This
gives us guidelines on what operations can be blue and which must be red.

- All non-commutative pairs of operations should be red.
- All invariant violating operations should be red.
- All other operations can be blue.

**Gemini.**
Gemini is a 10K line Java prototype implemented on top of MySQL. Each node in
Gemini consists of a storage engine, proxy server, concurrency coordinator, and
data writer. Users contact the proxy which executes the generator operations
and delivers shadow operations to the concurrency coordinator. It uses
optimistic concurrency control and vector clocks to ensure causal consistency.
It is not fault tolerant.
